---
title: "The effect of habitat variation on organisms of different body size"
author: "A. Andrew M. MacDonald, Vinicius F. Farjalla , Diane S. Srivastava"
fontsize: 12pt
output:
  pdf_document:
    includes:
      in_header: formatting/myheader.tex
    latex_engine: xelatex
  md_document: default
  html_document: default
  word_document:
    reference_docx: formatting/reference.docx
geometry: margin=1in
bibliography: /home/andrew/Documents/reference/Mendeley_reference_lists/04_OrgSizeHabitat.bib
---

## Abstract

Species composition of local communities often varies in response to
differences in the environment. Local organisms are "filtered" from the
regional species pool when their sensitivity to local environmental conditions
prevents their establishment or persistence. However, not all groups of
organisms are equally sensitive to the same environmental variation.
Observational studies have already suggested that larger-bodied species are
more strongly filtered by habitat than smaller- bodied species. However, this
mechanism has never been tested experimentally. In our study we placed highly
similar aquatic communities (composed of insects, zooplankton and bacteria)
into different environments and observed subsequent divergence in composition.
We predicted that insects would show a strong change in composition,
zooplankton a moderate change and bacteria little to no change. Our results are
consistent with these predictions, with the exception of a weaker signal in
insects than expected. These results suggest that organism size could provide
a framework for integrating studies of environmental filtering across
different scales and systems.

## Introduction

Community composition of local patches varies in response to the environment;
however not all species within a community respond in the same degree.
"Habitat filtering" occurs when qualities of the habitat (abiotic or biotic)
prevent species from colonizing or persisting in a habitat. In contrast,
neutral models of biodiversity consider all individuals in a community to be
demographically equivalent; differences in species composition are therefore
the result of dispersal and demographic stochasticity. This has led to the
approach of partitioning variance in community composition into variation
correlated with space, with environmental distance, or with their interaction.
These studies have returned mixed results for different groups of organisms
and systems (Cottenie). In one of the first studies across different groups of
organisms in the same community, Farjalla et al (2012) demonstrated that body
size is a key trait determining environmental signal in community composition.
They found that larger bodied organisms show a greater degree of
habitat filtering: there is weaker environmental structure as body size
decreases from insects (strong signal), zooplankton (moderate signal) and bacteria
(weak signal).

Why should the strength of environmental filtering decrease with organism
size? There are two possible mechanisms that may make communities of smaller
organisms less strongly filtered: increased dispersal rates and increased
plasticity. Dispersal rates increase when smaller organisms are easily
passively carried (e.g. by wind). Increased dispersal brings new immigrants
into a community, many of whom may not be able to persist without the constant
supply of new immigrants. These "source-sink" dynamics (Leibold) can lead to
similarity between patches even when their environments favour different
community compositions. Increased plasticity, on the other hand, occurs when
smaller-bodied species have broader fundamental niches than larger-bodied
species in the same community. This is the "size-plasticity" hypothesis of
Farjalla et al (2012). Bacteria and other small organisms are broadly
generalist in their ability to consume carbon sources and persist in different
climates (Finlay 2002) and are less constrained by the complex physiological
pathways posessed by larger metazoans. Additionally, smaller-bodied organisms
have shorter generation times and generally larger populations, which may
allow them the opportunity to evolve to a novel environment more rapidly than
larger-bodied organisms.

The size-plasticity hypothesis makes a testable prediction about the
consequences of environmental variation for similar communities: community
composition will become diverge in different environments, but this divergence
will be greatest between larger species and increasingly weak in smaller
organisms. To test these predictions, we performed a manipulative experiment
in the same habitat as Farjalla et al. (2012). We studied the same groups of
organisms (insects, zooplankton and bacteria) in the same patchy, highly
variable habitat (three species of tank bromeliads). We created communities
that were as similar as possible in composition, then exposed these
communities to their original environmental conditions. We predicted community
change to be greater and more consistent in insects, less strong in
zooplankton and absent in bacteria. If instead differences in communities are
driven by spatial processes we will see no difference in the strength of
environmental signal across all groups. We made predictions for two sources of environmental variation:

* __Between-species__: Our site contains three bromeliad species with different habitat preferences. We took advantage of this variation to select bromeliads of different species from different habitats. This creates the maximum differences in habitat possible, and is similar to the variation censused by Farjalla et al (2012). In this experiment, "habitat variation" includes variation in the local environment (sun/shade, amount of detritus input) and variation in bromeliad species.

* __Within-species__: One of the bromeliad species used in the between-species experiment is a broad habitat generalist. We conducted a second experiment with this species, testing how local environmental conditions (i.e. shady or exposed) influences community composition, while holding bromeliad species constant.

## Methods

### Study site and bromeliad species

We focussed on three species of bromeliads from contrasting habitats; the same
taxa as were surveyed in the original observational work. Each species was
collected from a habitat where they are commonly found: _Aechmea nudicaulis_
(full sun habitats), _Vriesea neoglutinosa_ (partial shade), and _Neoregelia
cruenta_ (deep shade). However, Neoregelia is also a habitat generalist; so
common and broadly distributed that it is found alongside all other species.
This made _Neoregelia_ a good choice for our within-species experiment. 

We performed our experiments at the Parque Nacional de Jurubatiba, Northeast
Rio de Janeiro state, Brazil. The landscape is composed of large semi-open
patches of shrubs which form shady patches interspersed with very exposed,
sunny habitats. Bromeliads form dense colonies in the landscape, which is
a dry sandy habitat (_restinga_ vegetation). The landscape is composed of
large semi-open stands of shrubs which create a mosiac of shade interspersed with
very exposed, open sand. Bromeliad taxa here are known to contain diverse
communities of macroinvertebrates, zooplankton and bacteria. 

Each experimental block contained six bromeliads; all six communities were
combined to form the starting community for all bromeliads in the block. Each
experiment consisted of five blocks. We created our starting communities by
sampling six bromeliads (between-species: two of each species; within-species:
three from open habitat, three from closed) and then redistributing their
macroinvertebrate fauna and tank water for zooplankton and bacteria. We refer
to these starting communities as "homogenized". Macroinvertebrate communities
were sampled by washing the plants throughly and seiving the water through 1mm
and 180Âµm mesh. They were then identified to the lowest taxonomic level
possible in the field (genus or family). Homogenized communities contained the
mean abundance of each macroinvertebrate morphospecies group from all six
original communities (adjusted for slight mortality during captivity). To
homogenize zooplankton, protist and bacteria communities, we collected an
equal volume of tank water from each plant, mixed and returned equal volumes
to all bromeliads. In our first experiment we used 100ml of inoculum from each
plant, standardizing the volume drawn from each.

All bromeliads were sterilized, returned to their original habitat and stocked
with the homogenized community. We sterilized plants by thoroughly rinsing
them with water, followed by 70% ethanol, and then hanging them upside down to
dry overnight. We confirmed that this technique removed all invertebrates and
most detritus by dissecting a steralized bromeliad. Plants were replaced in a
similar local habitat to their original, and enclosed in a 2mm mesh cage to
prevent colonization by insects. 

The experiment lasted for 2 weeks, after which we sampled and preserved all
macroinvertebrates, and a sample of zooplankton and bacteria.
Macroinvertebrates were identified while live and preserved in ethanol.
Zooplankton were collected on 50-micron Nytex mesh and fixed in 5% buffered
formalin. Subsamples (>100 individuals) were then identified to the lowest
taxonomic unit possible (species in most cases, except for bdelloid rotifers
and harpaticoid copepods, left at the level of class and order, respectively).
We measured bacterial community composition using denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis (DGGE; Muyzer et al. 1993). This analysis furnishes an
approximation of bacterial diversity in the form of Operational Taxonomic
Units (OTUs). We based our collection methods as closely as possible upon
previous observational work (Farjalla et al. 2010).

### Analyses

<!-- hypotheses you tested and what type of results you were
expecting -->

For eacn of our two experiments, we performed a pair of statistical tests: a
permutation test (PERMANOVA) to detect differences in the degree of
environmental signal among groups, and a multivariate regression of abundance
to identify those taxa which contributed most to the differences. PERMANOVA
measures the amount of difference in community composition between treatment
groups and compares this to the expected distribution under a null hypothesis.
If larger-bodied groups of organisms are more filtered, then we expect to find
a greater difference in community composition emerge among the
macroinvertebrates, less among the zooplankton, and little to none among
bacteria.

References

Farjalla, V. F., Srivastava, D. S., Marino, N. a C., Azevedo, F. D., Dib, V.,
Lopes, P. M., Esteves, F. A. (2012). Ecological determinism increases with
organism size. Ecology, 93(7), 1752â9.

Muyzer G., de Waal E.C., Uitterlinden A.G. (1993). Profiling of complex
microbial populations by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis analysis of
polymerase chain reaction-amplified genes coding for 16S rRNA. Applied
Environmental Microbiolology, 59(3), 695-700.

